---
title: "Learning experience with Handmade Hero"
---

I have been following along with the [Handmade
Hero](https://handmadehero.org/) project: the show where the host, Casey
Muratori, makes a complete game engine from scratch without using even the
C runtime library. It started mainly as a passion self-study project at
first, but now getting more "serieous" as now I'm planning to switch into
game programming for real. It occupies most of my free time besides my
dayjob at Hatch Entertainment.

# Why did I start doing this?

The reason why I started was because I'm fascinated by what Casey is able
to do on the show. With only one hour a night, he's able to accomplish more
than what I can do in days or even weeks (after learning how the code is
supposed to work), while explaining in painstaking details everything he
does. My job as a cloud engineer also involves a lot of programming and
this exercise has greatly improved my work.

The second reason was that Hatch (the company I worked for) is a game
company. We don't make games, and my job didn't necessarily involve any
game technology knowledge. However, I still think it's beneficial to gain a
basic understanding of how games work in general, to help in playtesting
our product.

The third reason was because I feel it's important to know how to make
fast, reliable software in general. In my day job, I've been exposed to so
much garbage, my favorite example being in Github Actions where [they don't
even know how boolean expressions
work](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/expressions#always).
Initially I didn't want to go to so much details here, but the rant
couldn't be surpressed:

Github Actions is a service that allows you to trigger some automated tasks
in response to something happening on Github. These tasks are defined in
terms of steps in a yaml file, for example

```yaml
steps:
- name: build-code
  run: make my-code
- name: notify-success
  run: ./notify-success.sh
```

Github Actions executes the above yaml step-by-step: it builds the code
first, then notify if the build succeeds. Nothing weird so far, but let's
focus on one hidden detail: `notify-success` won't get to run if
`build-code` fails. Again, this is a very sensible default: most people
would want their entire script to fail when any intermediate command
fails. Then comes the problem: what if we want to notify developers of
failures, too?

```yaml
steps:
- name: build-code
  run: make my-code
- name: notify
  run: ./notify.sh
```

the above script wouldn't work, since the `notify` won't run when
`build-code` fails. So the correct version is this:

```yaml
steps:
- name: build-code
  run: make my-code
- name: notify
  if: always()
  run: ./notify.sh
```

The idea is that you're supposed to use the magical `always()` expression
which (according to the docs) evaluates to `true` no matter what
happens[^always]. Now, can you think of another expression that always
evaluate to `true`, no matter what happens? That's right: it is `true`. And
if you're thinking "that's kinda redundant and dumb, but ultimately
harmless", well think again:

```yaml
steps:
- name: build-code
  run: make my-code
- name: notify
  if: true
  run: ./notify.sh
```

that above would **not** work, meaning that `notify` still **won't** run
when `build-code` fails. I have no idea why, but I guess `always` is a
magical "expression" where if the build runner sees it, the step condition
gets treated in a special way so as to bypass their special handling when
some intermediate step fails... I could never make sense of it, neither do
the people who specified the Github Actions syntax by the way, since they
evidently do not understand what "expressions" actually mean.

So yeah, bad software makes the world a bad place, such as wasting people's
time going on a tangent to complain about how bad your software is. I want
to build things that are solid, and for that I need to learn from one of
the best. Luckily, Casey is one of the best since he used to work at [Rad
game tools](http://www.radgametools.com/)[^rad].

# What did I learn?

The most important thing was how to actually learn effectively. I started
out by thinking "Well I'll just copy what Casey does and by the end: Bam!
I'll have 30-years worth of game dev experience, excluding the time it
takes to figure all these stuff out on my own". Casey seems to also
encourage the same thing since he tells his viewers at the beginning of
every video to "just download the source code and follow along at home". I
found after a dozen videos that I could not have been more wrong, for
reasons include but not limited to:

- The guy is really, really fast. This fact alone already narrows down the
  group of people who could possibly "follow along" to include those who
  can type at least 100 wpm. Either that or you have to have to alt-tab
  every 5s to pause the video (good luck if you're watching the stream on
  Twitch).

- Coding isn't painting. In order to follow someone's step, you gotta
  follow the whole way: use the exact same naming convention, same macros,
  same style, same variables, same functions, same formatting, etc. Your
  functions must be at the same locations in the file and for that matter,
  you need to have the exact same files. That leaves two options. Option 1:
  Do what you like and translate Casey's code to your own coding style
  on-the-fly (remember you must do that while typing 100 wpm). Option 2:
  subject to the constraints specified above, which slows you down
  tremendously (think 6x-10x, maybe even more).

- A portion of what he types in simply does not make sense. Although Casey
  is very good, he attempts to solve new problems on the stream, and
  sometimes he get things completely wrong. If you have read code any time
  in your life, you know how hard it is to understand even working programs
  that someone else wrote. Now imagine how hard it is to understand
  *non-working* programs (frankly, it's impossible). Therefore, if you're
  "following along", 100% chance is you're just training to become a
  stenographer by parroting what's already on the screen and not actually
  thinking.

- Debugging: I guess by now you already got the point. If debugging is like
  a puzzle game, then watching somebody else's debug code is like not
  playing the game at all.

So what I opted to do was this: I listen to Casey explaining what he plans
to do at the start, optionally watch him implement it a little bit (just
casually watching, not even paying too much attention). Then, after I
already know what to do, I implement a solution as I understand it in my
version of the code. Doing that forces me to come up with my own solution,
make my own mistakes, debug my own bugs, encounter my own problems, develop
my own style of programming. After obtaining a working program, I watch
back how Casey does it and compare our solutions. Very often I see
inefficiencies in my code so I clean them up. Sometimes I even gets things
completely wrong, but it's still fun to go back and fix the code on my
own. I find that this is a uniquely great way to learn since not very often
do you get to see someone else doing exactly what you've already done in a
cleaner and better way.

Right now I'm 93 episodes in, still a loooong way to go (at the moment of
writing the series has 661 episodes, and it's still ongoing!) But I'll
definitely finish it some day, 2 years, 5 years, even 10 years from
now. I'll post updates of my progress on this blog.

[^always]: Unrelated note: Technically that's not what the documentation
    says, but to my knowledge I've never found `always()` to evaluate to
    anything other than `true`. Plus *even if* `always()` were to be different
    from `true`, that'd make even less sense!

[^rad]: Having said that, I haven't personally used any of Rad's
    product. So I might still be wrong on that.
