## Programming isn't math

I've once heard this saying from Jon Blow (though I'm not sure if it was
original)

> Programming isn't math, it's physics

I think that's absolute true, someone coming from a math background must
learn to be wary of all sorts of things you never expect in math. In this
post I will give an example of that.

# Background

Suppose I'm making a 2D game involving rectangular shapes. Let's say I have
a 2D vector type and a struct representing a rectangle, which looks
something like this

```
struct v2
{
    r32 x, y;
};

struct rect2
{
    v2 min;
    v2 max;
};
```

Elaboration: `v2` is a straightforward packing of two 32-bit
floats. `rect2` represents a rectangle by a pair of (min, max) coordinates.

The problem is: given these

1. a rectangular entity at `origin` with dimension `dim`,
2. point `p`

find out if `p` is inside of the entity.

# The naive approach

I think many people would, like me, start with something like this

```
inline b32
checkOverlapBad(v2 origin, v2 dim, v2 p)
{
    rect2 hitbox = {origin, origin + dim};
    return inRectangle(hitbox, p);
}
```

so `hitbox` is the rectangle representing the hitbox of the entity in
question. And then we check if `p` is inside of the hitbox or not, using
the function `inRectangle` below

```
inline b32
inRectangle(rect2 rect, v2 point)
{
    return ((point.x >= rect.min.x) && (point.y >= rect.min.y)
            && (point.x < rect.max.x) && (point.y < rect.max.y));
}
```

This is already a working solution, but it has one major flaw. The flaw is
caused not by the programmer, but by the limitation of floating point
numbers in doing real number arithmetic.

For example, a math person would expect this loop to go on for a long time.

```
    for (r32 x = 1.0f; ; x *= 2)
    {
        v2 origin = {x, x};
        v2 p = {x+3.0f, x+3.0f};
        v2 dim = {3.005f, 3.005f};
        b32 bad_result = checkOverlapBad(origin, dim, p);
        assert(bad_result);
    }
```

Since you don't expect the assertion to fire, unless `x` gets absurdly
large or something.  Instead, the assertion fires at `x = 131072.0f`, which
is by no means a large number. The explanation is that in
`checkOverlapBad`, we add up `origin` and `dim`. The problem is when
`origin` gets too large, the result of the addition loses precision, and
you end up with a hitbox like this

```
hitbox = {min={x=131072.000 y=131072.000}
          max={x=131075.000 y=131075.000}}
```

the CPU has knocked out the `0.005f` fraction in order to make room for the
number's magnitude. Which means that our poor rectangle's dimension has
shrunk from `3.005f` to `3.000f`, which is no good.

# Can we do better?

Definitely. The point of this post is not to point out the obvious fact
that "computers have a finite number of bits", but to show that you can
maneuver around it by rearranging the calculation. If, instead of doing the
arithemtic in terms of "absolute coordinates" (that is, the coordinates
that `p` and `origin` are in), we do it relative to `origin` as follows

```
inline b32
checkOverlapGood(v2 origin, v2 dim, v2 p)
{
    v2 delta = p - origin;
    rect2 hitbox = {{0,0}, dim};
    return inRectangle(hitbox, delta);
}
```

This identical example fares better

```
    for (r32 x = 1.0f; ; x *= 2)
    {
        v2 origin = {x, x};
        v2 p = {x+3.0f, x+3.0f};
        v2 dim = {3.005f, 3.005f};
        b32 good_result = checkOverlapGood(origin, dim, p);
        checkOverlapGood(origin, dim, p);
        assert(good_result);
    }
```

The above assertion fires at `x = 16777216.0`, which is satisfactory
considering that `16777216.0 = 2^24`, so we've literally run out of bits to
represent `p` at that point (in this case `p=16777220.0`, not the correct
value of `16777219.005`). Our example failed because our coordinate system
can no longer represent coordinates precisely, and not because of the
combined magnitude range of *position plus dimension*, as in the case of
`checkOverlap`.

Plus, notice that our hitbox is a constant, so if I hadn't made `p` be
right at the edge (say, I could set `p={x+2.0f,x+2.0f}`), the loop
would continue to work until `x` reaches `inf`.

A significant improvement, obtained simply by doing the same math
differently.

# How does one find out about this?

I remember finding out about this by comparing my collision detection code
with Casey's. Since his code doesn't register collision involving entities
on different floors, and mine does. Had I not have example code to compare
my solution to, I would never have found out about the defects in my code.

In an alternative universe, I could have overlooked the whole thing. I
could have easily chalked it up to floating-point math being twiddly and
ignored the problem. There's no guarantee that you'll ever find out about
stuff like this on your own.

That's why I think in programming you need a bit of luck, as well as proper
guidance (which is also luck). I can't deny that this sounds discouraging,
but on the flip side it would be boring if everything was straight-forward.

# Sidenote: Weekly update

I've just finished episode 100 of Handmade Hero today. Stuff gets even
harder now with lighting. The hardest part is that everything is fake:

- the perspective is fake
- the ground is fake.
- the sky is fake.
- the z value is fake

It's all about making stuff up... but still it's the most fun I've ever
had!
